The HUM 101 Final Project

Due Dates  	

Topic Proposal: 	Wednesday	Mar. 06 by 11:59 pm. 
Thesis/Outline/Annotated Bib: 	Wednesday 	Apr. 03 by 11:59 pm.
Rough Draft: 	Wednesday 	Apr. 17 by 11:59 pm.
Final Draft: 	Monday 	May 06 by 11:59 pm.

Unexcused late projects will be penalized 10% per day late up to five days; after that they will not be accepted. 

Late projects will be accepted with no penalty for documented medical or legal reasons or other emergencies. Emergencies do not include work-related issues, work due in other classes, or a court date due to negligence on your part. 

Extensions must be requested at least 24 hours prior to the due date and must be requested in writing (email).

General Assignment Parameters  	

 	Select a topic of interest to you in Western culture from the Prehistoric period through the Middle Ages and must focus on at least two of the World Culture and Diversity Outcomes (see below).

 	Approved Cultures and Time Periods: the Prehistoric Era; the Ancient Near East; Ancient Egypt; the Classical world of Greece and Rome; Early or Byzantine Christianity; Islam in the West; or Medieval Europe. 

 	The project must be an argument with a thesis. A thesis statement is the hypothetical answer to a hypothetical question that has no one right answer. 

 	The project must use at least seven scholarly sources. Note the forbidden sources on page five of this document. 

 	You must cite all materials, whether you quote them directly or not, in the MLA format. Citations must appear in the body of the paper and on a works cited page.  Failure to cite properly will result in a failing grade on the assignment (but not necessarily a zero).

 	Grammar, formatting, and organization will count as part of the grade in addition to the content.

 	The finished project may take one of six forms:  a research paper, a museum project, a formal presentation, a visual arts portfolio, a website, or a creative project.

World Culture and Diversity Outcomes (Refresher)

You must use at least two of these in your project in some way. A lot of these outcomes are interconnected, so you should have no problem finding two. You should address these outcomes directly in the opening paragraph of your project.

	Describe the interdependence and interconnectedness of world systems (e.g., financial, technological, economic, political, religious, etc.) and their components (e.g., nations, ethnic groups, social classes, etc.).

	Explain basic information about other cultures (e.g., their histories, values, politics, economics, communication styles, values, beliefs, and/or practices).

	Evaluate issues of social justice and sustainable development (e.g., identify ethical, political, economic, social and/or environmental global challenges and evaluate local and broader consequences of individual and collective interventions).

	Describe ways in which marginalized groups define and express themselves, and the contexts in which these definitions are constructed.

	Explain how race, class, gender, and other categories of difference are socially constructed, flexible, and overlapping; how identities and their representations change over time; and/or how different identities intersect with one another and are shaped by power, privilege, and systemic discrimination.

	Demonstrate cultural awareness, sensitivity, diversity, and cultural competency (e.g., reflecting on one’s own personal identities, biases, and personal prejudices, and/or privilege; articulating how one’s own culture has shaped one’s identity and world view; and/or viewing difference as a learning opportunity and seeking out opportunities to communicate and participate constructively in a diverse community).

	Demonstrate skills of critical analysis in cross-cultural comparisons (e.g., compare beliefs, values, and assumptions between and among groups with respect to race, gender, sexual identity, nation faith, and/or economic circumstances).

Project Options

 	Research Paper:  7-10 pages, word-processed, double-spaced, with one-inch margins on all sides. 
 
o	The paper must include an introduction, with an arguable thesis; a body which provides sufficient evidence to support your thesis using outside sources and your own commentary; and a conclusion. 

o	If you focus on art objects or an artist, you are encouraged to include pictures within your paper, although this is not required, and if you do, you must include a photo credits page. Pictures are additional materials and do not count towards the page length. 

 	Museum Project: 7-10 pages, word-processed, double-spaced, with one-inch margins on all sides.

o	Review one of the exhibits at a Chicago area Museum that pertains to this course or review a virtual museum exhibit with an eye towards the two outcomes you choose and redesign it bringing it more in line with those outcomes.

o	In the project, you will describe the exhibit’s layout, present a researched discussion of at least five artifacts you would keep in the redesigned exhibit, critically review the exhibit (with an eye to the two outcomes), and write a proposal for redesign that incorporates cost analysis, among other things.

o	If you choose this option, let me know early because I have a special handout that describes this project in more detail.

o	If you focus on art objects or an artist, you are encouraged to include pictures within your paper, although this is not required, and if you do, you must include a photo credits page. Pictures are additional materials and do not count towards the page length. 

 	Formal Presentation: 15-20 minute presentation with a PowerPoint, formal outline, and Works Cited page.

o	A Presentation is structured like a paper:  an introduction with arguable thesis, a body which provides sufficient evidence to support your thesis using outside sources and your own commentary, and a conclusion. 

o	The difference in a presentation is that you always mention your sources by author’s last name and title of article; if there is no author, just the title. 

o	The outline should be a sentence outline which includes your thesis and main points with citations written in MLA format, just like a paper.

o	The PowerPoint should also have citations in the MLA format, and the Works Cited page can be your last screen.

o	If you focus on art objects or an artist, you are encouraged to include pictures within your paper, although this is not required, and if you do, you must include a photo credits page (this should be on separate screens of the PowerPoint. 

o	You will submit your PowerPoint to me before you give your presentation.

o	Presentations will be given during our final meeting (May 08), which means I can only allow up to three presentations. If there are more presentations, we will need to meet during exam week at our scheduled final exam meeting.

 	Visual Arts Portfolio:  15-page folder of images incorporating a specific thesis and should include captions, explanations, annotations. 

o	Include a  one or two page double-spaced introduction, explaining and arguing for a thesis for which the presented images are evidence. 

o	Include a one or two page double-spaced conclusion that ties your project together.

o	Captions and explanations should be single spaced and brief, used only to explain pictures if you feel the images are not clear. 

o	Use the MLA citation format, including a Picture credits page for images, and a works cited page for other sources. The Works Cited page should be double spaced.

o	If you download artwork from a website, make sure you have permission to use that material for your portfolio. 

 	Website:  Designed to provide a resource for more in-depth study of one topic of Western Culture and its historical and cultural importance. 

o	You may use any website format/design program you like and can work with easily. 

o	The works cited page can offer a recommended source list for further study, as well as include the sources you actually cite on the website and may include links to other relevant sites. 

o	Please separate the sources you cite from any additional sources you include. 

o	If you download artwork or music from a website, make sure you have permission to use that artwork for your site. 

o	Even in a website you must use MLA citation format when you cite from sources. 

o	The length of this project is negotiable.

o	You may collaborate with two other students to complete the website. Each group member needs to contribute equally to the research of this project and its execution (i.e., you should all complete roughly the same amount of written work).

 	Creative Option:  A variety of choices are available—a painting, sculpture, decorative art, invention, short story, poem, play, musical composition, etc. in the style of the movement/topic you have chosen to write about. Other options are negotiable. If you select the creative option, there are a couple things to keep in mind:  

o	You are required to submit a written rationale (approximately 5 pages) that explains what your point is in developing this creative piece and what its significance is for the study of Western history and culture. You will also need to explain the stylistic conventions of the topic you choose. 

o	Secondly, you must conduct research for this assignment, follow MLA citation format, and include a works cited page of at least 5 scholarly sources. Beyond these parameters, be as creative as you wish.
Steps in the Process 
	
	Introduction to the Final Project: Feb. 05 and Feb. 07. I will introduce the parameters and source requirements and conducting good research. We will have a reference librarian to help guide us through the library resources on Feb. 07. 

	Topic Proposal: Mar. 06. You will submit a formal topic proposal, which includes your topic, why you want to work with this topic, the form you want your project to take and why you choose this form, and some possible quotations you might use. You will also need a working bibliography of at least fifteen sources. The proposal will be uploaded to Safe-Assign on Blackboard by 11:59 pm. Be advised that if I do not approve your topic proposal, I will not accept your final project. The Proposal will contribute 50 points towards your final grade.

	Thesis, Outline, and Annotated Bibliography: Apr. 03. You will submit a formal thesis with an outline and an annotated bibliography. The outline should follow a sentence outline format, and the annotated bibliography of your final sources will include a brief summary of the source and how it will help you support your points in your project. All students will submit a thesis/outline. If you are doing a creative project, you should also include a sketch of what you are planning. The Thesis/Outline/Annotated Bibliography will contribute 100 points towards your final grade.

	Rough Draft: Apr. 17. A rough draft will be required to allow me to provide feedback and offer points for improvement before you submit the final version. It is best if you submit a complete draft, but any version of a draft will be helpful. The rough draft will contribute 100 points towards your final grade.

	Final Draft: May 06. Make sure you have reviewed the project carefully, had other people review it with you (including me), and completed it in the proper format before you submit it for a grade. The Final Draft will contribute 250 points towards your final grade.

Other Guidelines

	MLA citation format must be used wherever you use material from a source, whether you quote it directly or write it in your own words. 

	The only things that do not need citation are your own comments or information of common knowledge (i.e., Howard Carter discovered Tutankhamun’s tomb in 1922). 

	Follow MLA guidelines found in the Humanities Bible (on Bb) or the MLA handbook (9th ed.) 

	U.S. copyright and Harper College regulations concerning citations govern written texts, e-mail, software programs, and Internet sites. 

	FORBIDDEN SOURCES:  Wikipedia, Dictionary.com, About.com, Schmoop, Sparks’ Notes, Cliffs’ Notes, and the like. See below for more details.

	ACCEPTABLE SOURCES:  Books, e-books, pdf copies of print books, and on-line databases; I must approve internet/web-based sources.

	All papers must have a title, and please make it more interesting than “Research Paper” or “Olympic Games.”  The title should reflect what your paper is about.

	Your audience for this paper is the world at large wishing to learn something about your topic. You should not assume that your reader knows anything about it.

Important:  I will deduct points for all formatting and MLA infractions, no exceptions.




Forbidden Sources (You cannot Cite These)

	Wikipedia:	A good source to find other sources and references, but Wikipedia can be written and edited by anyone, so you can’t trust it. I am okay with using it to find other sources, but don’t cite it in your project.

	YouTube:	I use it all the time, but YouTube videos are meant to be stimuli for discussion or to make a quick point. They’re not supposed to be the “final word” on a topic, or even an authoritative and credible essay source. Review them for information but look for credible print sources. 

	Google Books:	A good reference source, but they are previews of longer books; find the actual source, not Google Books.

	Essay Sharing Websites:	Schmoop, Essays.com, etc. These are websites that give you access to previous students’ essays, but they may not be fully accurate, or they may be high school essays, and you shouldn’t trust them. Besides, it is too easy to “accidentally” copy them and not give the correct citation.

	Online Quotes:	Quotes from the internet are far too often, inaccurate, taken out of context, and not always relevant. If you still really like a quote, try to read the original source text and see what the person is actually saying. 

	Information Websites:	About.com, History.com, etc. It is not that the information is inaccurate, but often the sources are not cited, so it is difficult to know if the source is credible.

	Information Blogs:	Sparks’ Notes, Cliffs’ Notes, etc. These sources are often accurate, but they generally only touch the surface of the material and don’t go into enough depth. As always, start there, but go much deeper.

I mention these “forbidden” sources, so that you will approach the project with more depth. You really need to use credible sources, and credible sources are up to date (written within the past five to ten years), relevant to your topic specifically, and peer reviewed by other scholars within the field. 

Christine Kuffel, our reference librarian will show us credible sources and how to find these sources in the library and the library databases. Internet sources are convenient and easy to use but avoid temptation. Always obtain my approval for internet-based sources before you use them.

Some Formatting Rules (Otherwise known as Jensen’s Pet Peeves)

1.	Follow the guidelines outlined above.
 
2.	Do not use the forbidden sources.

3.	The heading of your paper should include your name, the class and section (i.e., HUM 101-001 or -002), my name, and the date of submission. You must single space the heading.

4.	All time periods should be capitalized (i.e., Prehistoric, Sumerian, New Kingdom, Bronze Age, Early Medieval, etc.).

5.	When referring to an author/artist/scholar, write out the full name the first time you mention him/her and use the last name after that. You are not personally acquainted with the person and should not use the “familiar” first name.

6.	Numbers one to ten should be written out; numbers 11 onward may be written as numbers.

7.	The word “God” is capitalized if you are referring to the Judeo-Christian-Muslim God; otherwise, the word is not capitalized.

8.	Full-length books, epic poems, plays, and movie or television titles are italicized at all times.

9.	Articles, short stories, shorter poems, and episodes of movies or TV shows should be put in “quotation marks.”

Grading Criteria

Listed below are the questions I will ask as I read your projects and will use them to determine your grade.

	Do you create a question that has a controversial answer and answer that question? How completely do you answer it? How well do you stick to answering the question and avoid drifting away from it?

	Do you demonstrate knowledge of and understanding of the material you have covered as it relates to your topic?

	Do you make a reasonable argument? Is your answer logical, based on evidence and rational argument? 

	Do you present enough convincing evidence to support your arguments? Do you consider all relevant, available evidence?

	Do you cite sources properly, whenever necessary? Do you use quotations, paraphrases, summaries, etc. and cite them correctly?

	Do you apply general principles of good writing? Are you clear, concise, and generally grammatical?

The paper is worth 250 points of the course grade. After I have given the initial points, I will deduct points for the following specific infractions/errors:

	Papers that do not follow the proper margins (one inch):		12 points
	Papers WITHOUT the proper heading and format:	Up to	25 points
	NO Works Cited Page:		25 points

You may think I’m obsessive or picky, but attention to even the small details is important. Surgeons who miss that one speck of dust on their skin when they are scrubbing for surgery could kill their patients. These issues I mention may not be as critical, but they are important and should not be ignored. 

Finally, I am not your editor. The paper must be carefully proofread and checked for spelling, typographical errors, punctuation, and major grammatical issues before you submit it. Do not rely on the Editor function in Microsoft Word (or whatever editing function your word processor uses); these corrections are not always accurate, and the program will not notice if you are using the wrong form of a word (e.g., to, too, two; where, were, wear; their, there, they’re; etc.). I will deduct points for grammar errors, and I will use the following as a guide to determine the number of points:

 
	00-05 errors:  00 points
	06-10 errors:  05 points
	11-15 errors:  10 points
	16-20 errors:  15 points
	21-25 errors:  20 points
	26-30 errors:  25 points
	31-35 errors:  30 points
	36-40 errors:  35 points 
	41-45 errors:  40 points
	46-50 errors:  45 points
	51-?? errors:  50 points 

Please note:  The above rubric is for minor errors, such as misspellings, comma errors, or other typos; major grammatical errors such as run-on sentences, sentence fragments, or errors that make reading the essay difficult could result in further deductions. 
