Building the Great Pyramid: Probable Construction Methods Employed at Giza
Author(s): James Frederick Edwards
Source: Technology and Culture , Apr., 2003, Vol. 44, No. 2 (Apr., 2003), pp. 340-354 
Published by: The Johns Hopkins University Press and the Society for the History of 
Technology 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/25148110

REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/25148110?seq=1&cid=pdfreference#references_tab_contents

You
may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
The Johns Hopkins University Press  and Society for the History of Technology  are
collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Technology and Culture
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 RESEARCH NOTE
 Building the Great Pyramid
 Probable Construction Methods Employed at Giza
 JAMES FREDERICK EDWARDS
 Every year, droves of visitors travel to Egypt to gaze upon the oldest sur
 vivor of the seven wonders of the ancient world. Most of them ask the same
 question: "How was it built?"
 The largest in a group of three, the Great Pyramid was begun by King
 Khufu during the Fourth Dynasty of the Old Kingdom in Egypt, which
 commenced with the reign of King Sneferu, approximately 2613 b.c.e., and
 ended with the death of King Shepseskaf circa 2500 b.c.e.1 Its original outer
 casing stone and some other blocks have been removed, but at 147.5 meters
 high and 230 meters square at the base, its volume, when first built, would
 have exceeded 2,600,000 cubic meters. It has been estimated that 2,300,000
 separate blocks of stone, the majority weighing between 2 and 3 tonnes,
 were used in its construction.2 There has always been much speculation
 about how it was constructed, and Egyptologists and historians are divided
 Dr. Edwards is a chartered consultant engineer and physicist. He is head of rehabilitation
 engineering services at South Manchester University Hospitals NHS Trust, Manchester,
 England, where he is currently working on a number of research and development proj
 ects in the field of medical physics. He is a coauthor of Properties of Materials (1986),
 Statics (1989), and Motion and Energy (1993), and has also written numerous other tech
 nical and nontechnical books. He thanks Chris Scarre of the McDonald Institute for Arch
 aeological Research, Cambridge, for pointing him in the direction of Technology and
 Culture, and Kath Mannion for putting his handwritten notes into a typed format. He also
 thanks the Technology and Culture referees and editors for their helpful suggestions.
 ?2003 by the Society for the History of Technology. All rights reserved.
 0040-165X/03/4402-0005$8.00
 1. Of the numerous books written about Egyptian pyramids, a good general source
 is Mark Lehner, The Complete Pyramids (London, 1997). For Egyptian construction
 methods, see Dieter Arnold, Building in Egypt: Pharaonic Stone Masonry (New York and
 Oxford, 1991).
 2. Lehner, 202. Most of the building stone used for the core blocks was quarried close
 by the pyramid. The stone for the outer casing blocks, which was a harder, more homo
 geneous white limestone, was brought from Tura, across the Nile Valley from Giza. The
 small number of large granite blocks used for the burial chamber, and for plugging up
 passages, were brought from Aswan, some 500 miles to the south.
 340
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EDWARDS I Building the Great Pyramid
 about the building techniques employed. The majority favor the idea that
 gigantic ramps were used to lift the building blocks to their locations within
 the structure, while others claim that levering systems were employed.
 The principal theory is that a massive ramp was built against one full
 face of the pyramid, and was lengthened as construction proceeded.3
 Various gradients have been proposed for such a ramp, although a slope of
 1 in 10 is considered the most practical. Such a ramp would have been Research
 about 1 lli kilometers long and have required more than three times the vol- note
 ume of material used in the completed pyramid. Apart from the mammoth
 task of building it, maintaining the ramp during construction of the pyra
 mid would have been a colossal undertaking in its own right. It is difficult
 to guess where such a ramp might have been located. A l-in-10 gradient
 could not have been achieved from the adjacent quarry area, and the local
 topography and other building works in the vicinity would have placed
 severe restrictions upon its location.
 Another proposal is that there was a spiral ramp or combination of
 ramps around the structure of the pyramid. Numerous virtually insur
 mountable problems would have been associated with physically support
 ing and constructing such ramps.4 Furthermore, they would have afforded
 only a relatively narrow hauling surface, a problem exacerbated by the
 simultaneous use of the ramp by both the ascending and descending haul
 ing teams. The hauling teams would also have encountered great difficulty
 negotiating the tight right-angled turns at each corner of the pyramid.
 Although the foundations of a number of small, embankment-like
 structures have been discovered adjacent to the Great Pyramid, it seems
 likely that these were only used for elevating blocks at a very low level dur
 ing the initial stages of the pyramid's construction.5 Large ramps of any
 type would have generated an enormous amount of material, and there is
 no such volume of material at or near the construction site. There is, there
 fore, a dearth of conclusive archaeological evidence supporting the theory
 that such massive ramps were constructed in the vicinity of the Great
 Pyramid.
 3. The various ramp theories are fully explained by Lehner, 215-17. See also Zahi
 Hawass, "The Pyramids," in Ancient Egypt, ed. David P. Silverman (London, 1997), 168
 91; Arnold, 98-101.
 4. Peter Hodges, How the Pyramids Were Built, ed. Julian Keable (Dorset, 1989),
 125-27. As a spiral ramp progressively increased in height its sides would need to be ver
 tical in order for it not to encroach upon its own lower stages. For such a structure to be
 inherently stable it would need to be constructed from material meeting criteria
 approaching those for the pyramid itself (i.e., stone). It is also extremely doubtful that
 support for such a structure could be provided off the angled faces of the pyramid.
 5. Lehner, 217, 221. Shallow, low-level ramps were probably used during the con
 struction of the lower courses of the pyramid. The exposed lower courses of outer cas
 ing blocks on the adjacent Menkaure pyramid reveal a number of undressed stones that
 were probably initially covered by such ramps.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 341
 TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE
 APRIL
 2003
 VOL. 44
 Alternatively, it has been proposed that every individual block of stone
 used in the construction of the Great Pyramid was elevated into position
 using levers and packing pieces.6 Such a technique involves jacking up a
 block at one side with lever and fulcrum, inserting a wooden packing piece,
 jacking up the opposite side of the block in a similar manner, and then
 repeating the process until the desired elevation is achieved. It has been esti
 mated that a vertical distance equivalent to the thickness of one course of
 block in the Great Pyramid could have been achieved in about 5 minutes by
 a team of four men operating two levers per side.7 The exposed core blocks
 of the Great Pyramid suggest that it was constructed as a "coursed" pyramid,
 as it consists of level courses of stones. Although these courses vary slightly
 in thickness, each separate course appears to be a level array of squared
 stones. Once a block had been lifted one course, it would have had to be
 moved horizontally onto the bottom of the next course, whereupon the pro
 cedure could be repeated, until the working plateau had been reached. By
 the time the Great Pyramid had reached half its completed height, some fif
 teen hundred separate jacking actions, together with approximately eighty
 horizontal transfers, would have had to be undertaken for a single block, all
 requiring a degree of precision in order to avoid any mishaps.
 Both the ramp and lever methods would have been inefficient in their
 deployment of personnel, for in both cases the haulers and lifters would
 have had to ascend and descend the pyramid structure as part of each ele
 vating cycle. Such approaches would also have been extremely time con
 suming; at the halfway point in the pyramid's construction the elevating
 cycle for one core block would have been forty minutes using a straight
 ramp and seven hours using levers.8
 It has also been proposed that a type of shaduf?a counterbalanced
 sweep used in the ancient world to raise water?could have been used to lift
 the pyramids' building blocks.9 Such an approach would have necessitated
 6. Hodges, chap. 1. One must conclude from a perusal of this book that Hodges is
 constantly attempting to make his theories fit in with the writings of Herodotus, who
 visited the pyramids at Giza some two thousand years after their construction.
 Herodotus' writings are open to many interpretations, and because of the length of time
 that elapsed between the pyramids' construction and his visit, they can at best only be
 taken as conjecture. For the translated details, see Herodotus: The Histories, trans. Aubrey
 de Selincourt (Harmondsworth, 1954).
 7. Hodges, 83.
 8. At the halfway point in the pyramid's construction, assuming a hauling speed of
 0.6 meters per second (1.36 miles per hour) the time taken to achieve a nonstop ascent
 of a l-in-10 ramp would be about twenty-one minutes. Allowing time for descending
 and contingencies, the "hauling cycle" can be estimated at forty minutes per block. For
 the levering technique described by Hodges, the average time to elevate a single block at
 this same point in construction works out to about seven hours, although there would
 have been scope for elevating numerous blocks in unit time using this method.
 9. Richard Koslow, "How the Egyptians Built the Pyramids," www.egyptspyra
 mids.com/html/article.html.
 342
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EDWARDS I Building the Great Pyramid
 the construction of substantial wooden towers in order to withstand the
 forces involved. It is proposed that the pyramids' outer building blocks were
 initially left square and untrimmed and that the wooden towers were
 moved up the stepped sides of the pyramid as construction proceeded?an
 operation fraught with danger, as well as an extremely time-consuming and
 impractical one.
 Because of the problems alluded to, it must be concluded that these Research
 ramp and lever theories present unsatisfactory resolutions relating to the note
 methodology employed for the elevation of the building blocks.
 Hauling Stone Blocks
 It is possible to deduce, from contemporary and even ancient evidence,
 certain scientific parameters relating to the hauling of stone blocks.
 During recent experiments relating to the hauling of stone blocks at
 Karnak Temple, it was found that three men could pull a sledge-mounted
 block weighing one tonne over a stone surface that had been lubricated
 with water to reduce the effects of friction.10 From this evidence we can, by
 making some practical assumptions, determine the frictional effects en
 countered by the haulers.
 Friction is a resistive force that prevents two objects from sliding freely
 against each other. The relationship between the force of friction and the
 pressure between the two surfaces?called the normal pressure?is given
 by the coefficient of friction, which is generally denoted by the Greek letter
 jul. There are different types of and values for the coefficient of friction,
 depending on the type of resistive force. In the case of hauling stone blocks,
 we are interested in the kinetic coefficient of friction, which concerns the
 force restricting the movement of an object sliding on a relatively smooth
 hard surface.11 This is represented by the equation p, = F h- N, where F is
 the force of friction and N is the normal pressure between two surfaces.
 At this stage we have to make an assumption regarding the individual
 force exerted by each hauler. It has been estimated that an individual man
 is capable of exerting a pulling force equal to 150 pounds, or 68 kilo
 grams.12 This would appear to be a credible number, as it seems reasonable
 to think that an adult male would be capable of exerting a force approach
 ing his own body weight, and 68 kilograms would be 90 percent of the body
 10. Lehner (n. 1 above), 224.
 11. For examples of kinetic coefficients of friction for various mixes of materials, see
 www.physlink.com/Education/AskExperts/ael39.cfm. There appear to be no definitive
 data available relating to the value of kinetic coefficient of friction between wood and
 lubricated stone. The kinetic coefficient of friction between wood and wood
 is 0.2. This value would diminish if a lubricant were intro
 duced between the sliding surfaces.
 12. Koslow, 2.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 343
 TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE
 APRIL
 2003
 VOL. 44
 weight of a man weighing 75 kilograms (165 pounds). Substituting known
 and assumed values for the example of hauling carried out at Karnak yields
 this estimated kinetic coefficient of friction:
 F 3><68 K^A
 U = ?=-= 0.204
 N 1x1,000
 We can now turn to an example of hauling known to have been carried
 out in ancient Egypt. In the Twelfth Dynasty tomb of the nobleman
 Djehuty-hotep at Deir el-Bersha, there is a wall painting (fig. 1) showing a
 statue of the tomb owner being hauled on a sledge. The statue, which is
 known to have weighed about 58 tonnes, is being hauled by 172 men in
 four files of 43. A man is shown standing on the base of the statue pouring
 liquid from a jar onto the ground in front of the statue/sledge assembly.
 Three other men are carrying yokes of two fresh jars of liquid each, while
 other men walk behind the statue. Three more men are carrying what
 appears to be a large lever.13 We can use the estimated kinetic coefficient of
 friction determined for hauling the Karnak block, 0.204, to test whether the
 painting is accurate in terms of the number of haulers depicted in it. If the
 force of friction F = 68 X H (where H is the number of haulers) and nor
 mal pressure N = 58 tonnes, or 58,000 kilograms, then
 0.204 = ^
 58,000
 ? 0.204x58,000 11,832 ._A
 ti =-=-= 174
 68 68
 As the number of haulers depicted in the tomb painting is 172, the cor
 relation between the two sets of data is remarkably close.
 What conclusions can be drawn from these results? First, assuming that
 68 kilos is a reasonable estimate for the equivalent force exerted by one
 hauler, then the estimated kinetic coefficient of friction for hauling both
 the Karnak blocks and the statue of Djehuty-hotep is 0.204. Second, while
 the estimated kinetic coefficient of friction would vary depending upon the
 exact amount of pulling force required to be exerted by the haulers, the
 important factor is that there is a direct correlation between the contem
 porary and ancient estimates, which implies that the amount of required
 pulling force exerted by each individual hauler was similar in both cases.
 Third, the calculations support the assumption that the wall painting in the
 tomb of Djehuty-hotep at Deir el-Bersha is accurate in terms of the num
 ber of haulers depicted in it. Fourth, the estimates and calculations provide
 13. Lehner, 203.
 344
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 (ft as,1 \\ ^V\ J^ j?^
 5"
 FIG. t The wall painting in the tomb of Djehuty-hotep showing his statue being moved by a team of men dragging it on a sledge. *2
 w (Mark Lehner, The Complete Pyramids [London, 1997], 203. Drawing by Philip Winton. Reprinted with permission of Thames and S"
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 ft Hudson, London and New York.) C\
 S
 m -i
 z > SJ o ^ 3 m X Q.
 TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE
 APRIL
 2003
 VOL. 44
 strong evidence that the lubricating medium used for moving the ancient
 statue was water.14
 Adequate ropes would have been required to haul the blocks of stone.
 A rope of about 8 centimeters diameter would have been a practical size for
 a team of haulers to handle. Such ropes are capable of hauling loads in
 excess of 4 tonnes and can be made from the doum palm, a tree indigenous
 to Upper Egypt.15
 Lifting the Stone for the Great Pyramid
 From an engineering point of view, a basic question to ask, when
 attempting to propose probable methods and techniques involved with lift
 ing the building blocks is, "why build separate ramps when the pyramid has
 four inclined planes as an integral part of its structure?" Granted, these
 inclined planes are steep, lying at 52 degrees to the horizon. But we can
 examine the forces and methods required to lift blocks up them based on
 the aforementioned parameters coupled with some simple mathematics.
 The force P to pull a body up an inclined plane (the force being parallel
 to the plane) is given by the equation P = W (uxosa + sina), where Wis the
 weight of the body, |x is the kinetic coefficient of friction between the body
 and the plane, and a is the angle that the inclined plane makes with the hori
 zon (fig. 2).16 As the majority of the core blocks in the Great Pyramid weigh
 14. Other practical experiments relating to the hauling of stone blocks have also
 been carried out; see Michael Barnes et al., Secrets of Lost Empires (London, 1996), 61-62.
 In 1995, a team of Egyptologists built, in Giza, a small pyramid using blocks similar in
 size to those used for the core and outer casing blocks of the Great Pyramid. When com
 pleted, this tiny pyramid was 6 meters high and 9 meters square at the base. The team
 moved 2-tonne blocks mounted on wooden sledges over a surface of tafia (a type of clay)
 and wood, lubricated with water, using two files of men hauling on 4-centimeter-diam
 eter ropes. It was found that twelve men could move the blocks with ease up an inclined
 roadway. This team favored the idea that massive ramps had been constructed in order
 to lift the building blocks of the Great Pyramid, and they used ramps and lever tech
 niques to construct their tiny version of a pyramid. In effect, they constructed the very
 last few blocks of the Great Pyramid, but at ground level?which, although a useful exer
 cise in some respects, did not meaningfully relate to the massive scale of work carried out
 on the ancient monument.
 15. Machinery's Handbook, 20th ed. (New York, 1978), 1122-26. The working load of
 an 8-centimeter fiber rope, when used at low speeds (up to 1.5 meters per second), is
 about 4.2 tonnes. The ultimate tensile strength of such a rope is about 29 tonnes, and it
 weighs approximately 4.3 kilograms per meter. The working load is calculated conserv
 atively and provides a safety margin of almost 7 (29 -r- 4.2). The ancient Egyptians would
 not have been aware of such criteria, and they probably subjected such ropes to a higher
 working load. Because of the high safety factor, some excess loading would have been
 acceptable as long as the rope was not subjected to a suddenly applied shock load. When
 hauling blocks of stone it is reasonable to assume that loads would be gradually applied
 and that motion would be within the upper limit of 1.5 meters per second.
 16. Ibid., 307.
 346
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EDWARDS I Building the Great Pyramid
 V ^ RESEARCH
 Stone block /v/ / NOTE
 and sledge / n. /
 / W /
 X/X p = 0.204
 /a =52?_
 P = W(ucosa + sina)
 P = (Wb+Ws+Wr)(0.204cos52? + sin52?)
 FIG. 2 Graphic representation of hauling forces.
 about 2 tonnes, let us use such a block as an example in order to calculate
 the force required to haul it up one side of the pyramid. Let us make these
 further assumptions: that these core blocks were laid layer by layer and that
 the outer casing blocks were put into position on the faces up which haul
 ing was taking place as each layer of core blocks was laid; that these outer
 casing blocks, which were of a harder and more durable material than the
 core blocks, would have been dressed by the stonemasons on their angled
 outside surfaces in order to provide a reasonably smooth surface for the
 blocks to be hauled up on; that they would have been made oversize so that
 enough material would remain to allow final dressing of the stones once
 construction had been completed. It is probable that the oversized angled
 profiles of the outer surfaces of the casing stones were undercut to provide
 a series of horizontal ledges that would facilitate the erection of scaffolding
 from which the final dressing could be achieved. It is also highly likely that
 the stones at each extreme corner of each course of blocks were cut to their
 final shapes as building work progressed; this would have ensured the geo
 metrical accuracy of the four angled corners and provided a guide for the
 final dressing process of each separate face.
 The force required to keep a sledge-mounted, 2-tonne block being
 hauled on a single 8-centimeter rope moving up an angled face of the pyra
 mid is around 2V2 tonnes.17 The maximum number of haulers required to
 17. Consider the situation when the pyramid had reached half its completed height
 (about 74 meters above ground level). At this height each angled face would be 94 meters
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 347
 TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE
 APRIL
 2003
 VOL. 44
 sustain this force is about fifty.18 A greater force would have been required
 in order to commence motion. This could have been provided by, say, four
 additional workers at the base of the pyramid. Such a team would be
 required anyway in order to deal with positioning the assembly and fasten
 ing the rope to it. Once the team had completed these tasks it would then,
 in conjunction with the hauling team of fifty men on the pyramid's plateau,
 prepare the assembly for its journey up the face of the pyramid and assist
 in providing its initial movement.
 In order to provide the necessary lubrication at the interface between the
 block and sledge assembly and the outer casing blocks, water, which was in
 abundant supply from the adjacent canal and harbor complex, was proba
 bly poured down the face of the pyramid up which hauling was taking
 place.19 Alternatively, a person of small stature, and thus light weight, may
 have ridden up with the assembly, applying lubricant from a vessel, as in the
 example of moving the statue of Djehuty-hotep. (The addition of a "lubri
 cator" would not have had a significant effect on the required hauling force).
 At the halfway point (about 74 meters high), the hauling team would
 long, and the flat plateau onto which the blocks would be hauled would be about 115
 meters square. Assuming that a single 8-centimeter rope was used to haul one block up
 one face of the pyramid and that the block was mounted on a wooden sledge, the total
 weight W would equal the weight of the block plus the weight of the sledge plus the effec
 tive weight of the rope. If we stipulate 2 tonnes for the block, 0.3 tonnes for the sledge,
 and 0.5 tonnes for a 120-meter-long rope, we arrive at a value for W of 2.8 tonnes. We
 can substitute the estimated kinetic coefficient of friction from the previous examples,
 0.204, and we know that the angle of inclination is 52 degrees to the horizontal. Thus,
 substituting in the formula
 P = W(\xcosa + sina)
 we see that
 P= 2.8(0.204 X 0.616 + 0.788) = 2.8(0.914) = 2.56
 It should be noted that if the value of the kinetic coefficient of friction were doubled
 the resulting value of P would only increase by 13.7 percent, to 2.91 tonnes, which would
 require five additional haulers to sustain (see n. 18).
 18. As with the example of transporting the statue of Djehuty-hotep, it is assumed
 that one man exerts a force equivalent to 68 kilograms. The number of men required to
 keep the block and sledge assembly moving up an angled face of the pyramid is (2.56 X
 1000) -f- 68 = 37.6 men. However, this is for a hauling force which is parallel to the pyra
 mid's face, whereas the haulers would actually be pulling in a horizontal direction across
 the pyramid's plateau. It is suggested that protective wooden battens were used at the
 point where the rope passed over the lip of the top outer casing block, and an additional
 hauling force would be required in order to overcome the frictional effects between the
 battens and the rope. This is difficult to estimate, although it may have accounted for an
 increase in force of about 20 percent, requiring a total hauling team of forty-five men.
 Allowing for contingencies, then, stipulate a maximum of fifty men.
 19. Lehner (n. 1 above), 204-5. It is known, from archaeological evidence, that there
 was a harbor and interlinked canal system adjacent to the construction site, which were
 fed by the waters of the Nile.
 348
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EDWARDS I Building the Great Pyramid
 have had enough available space on the plateau to have hauled the block
 and sledge assembly up the face of the pyramid and onto the plateau in one
 continuous movement. The assembly would have "tipped" easily onto the
 plateau due to the generous angle between the face of the pyramid and the
 plateau, and wooden battens were probably used to prevent the hauling
 ropes from fraying.20 (It is possible that the outer casing blocks might have
 been covered with a latticework of wood over which the block and sledge research
 assemblies were hauled). Once the blocks had reached the plateau, far less note
 energy would have been required to move them into position than had
 been needed to lift them to the plateau. Levering techniques would proba
 bly have been used to remove the blocks from the sledges and position
 them accurately in their final locations. Obviously, as the height of con
 struction increased the additional weight of rope would have had an effect,
 although not a significant one, and it would have remained feasible to lift
 blocks of up to about 4 tonnes on a single rope. Thus, the vast majority of
 the blocks used in the construction of the pyramid (the core blocks and
 outer casing blocks) could have been lifted using the methods described.
 For the relatively few heavier blocks within the structure it would have been
 necessary to use multiple ropes, with a corresponding increase in man
 power in order to facilitate lifting.
 Constructing the Great Pyramid
 We have shown that the building blocks used to construct the Great
 Pyramid could have been hauled up a face of the pyramid. Using this
 approach as a reasonable model, we can now consider the probable build
 ing processes.
 It would be reasonable to assume that a logical methodology was
 applied to the construction sequences and that a systematic approach was
 employed involving organized teams. We can only guess at what that
 approach might have been. Each team would have been responsible for
 hauling the blocks onto the plateau and then moving them to their final
 positions. Suppose that each team was assigned an area to work within and
 be responsible for. If this area were about 5 meters wide, it would have
 allowed sufficient room for teams to have kept clear of each other when
 hauling. This means that a 5-meter-wide "slipway" would have been as
 signed up a hauling face of the pyramid and then carried across the flat sur
 face of the plateau. Let us consider the situation at different stages of the
 pyramids' construction.
 When the pyramid had reached about a quarter of its height, the pla
 20. Apart from manufacturing protective battens to prevent the ropes from fraying,
 it is probable that joiners would have constructed many diverse devices in order to aid
 both the hauling and building processes.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 349
 TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE
 APRIL
 2003
 VOL. 44
 teau would have been approximately 173 meters square and 37 meters
 above ground level. At this point each angled face would have been 47
 meters in length. Approximately 1,327,100 blocks of stone would have been
 laid, accounting for about 58 percent of the volume of the completed pyra
 mid. There would have been thirty-five 5-meter-wide slipways at this
 height, and, due to the size of the plateau, it would have been possible to
 simultaneously haul blocks up two opposing faces. The teams would have
 commenced by laying blocks at the center of the plateau and then working
 outward toward each hauling face. This would have produced a capacity of
 seventy blocks per lift at this height. As construction continued from the
 center outward the hauling teams would have moved onto the top of the
 current course of blocks in order to have effected lifting. This two-sided
 approach could have continued up to a height of about 40 meters, at which
 stage the hauling teams would have begun to intrude upon each other's
 hauling space, assuming that lifting took place in one continuous move
 ment. Because on average each core block is about a one-meter cube, each
 hauling team would have been responsible for laying a course of blocks
 about 5 meters wide. At a height of 40 meters, over 60 percent of the vol
 ume of the pyramid would have been completed and approximately
 1,400,000 blocks of stone laid.
 An assumption at this stage is that a section of one of the faces not
 being used for hauling would have been kept free of outer casing blocks to
 provide a "stairway" for the workforce to climb to and from the plateau.
 Interior passages and stairs leading up and down to various chambers
 would also have served as temporary ways for the workforce to reach the
 construction site.
 Between the heights of 40 meters and 74 meters (half the height of the
 completed pyramid) the hauling of the stone blocks could have been car
 ried out up one face in a single continuous movement. At the halfway point
 the plateau would have been approximately 115 meters square, and each
 angled face would have been 94 meters long. Approximately 2,012,500
 blocks of stone would have been laid, accounting for almost 88 percent of
 the volume of the completed pyramid. There would have been twenty-three
 5-meter-wide slipways at this height, and upon reaching the plateau the
 blocks would have been taken to the opposite side of the plateau and laid
 back toward the hauling face, with each hauling team laying block in rows
 five blocks wide. The time taken to haul one block up the face of the pyra
 mid at this point in the construction process would have been less than 3
 minutes, as compared to 40 minutes for the ramp theory and 7 hours for
 the lever theory at this same point.
 As the building work progressed, the plateau would have become pro
 gressively smaller, reducing the working area. Between 74 meters and 80
 meters two ropes might have been used in order to maximize the working
 space. Two files would take up only half the length of a single rope hauling
 350
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EDWARDS I Building the Great Pyramid
 team, and the lift could still have been achieved in one continuous move
 ment. At the 80-meter point over 90 percent of the volume of the pyramid
 would have been completed and approximately 2,076,900 blocks laid.
 Technically, the final 10 percent (by volume) of the pyramid would have
 been the most difficult to construct. Above 80 meters, the task of hauling
 the blocks up to the higher levels would have been more laborious as the
 surface area of the plateau decreased. As progress continued, it would be Research
 likely that the blocks would have been hauled up in stages. note
 Once all the building blocks had been positioned, the outer casing
 blocks would have required dressing in order to achieve a smooth outer
 surface. This not inconsiderable task was probably effected using wooden
 scaffolding from which the stonemasons could carry out their work.
 Chippings, assumed to be from this dressing work, have been discovered at
 the base of the Great Pyramid.21
 It is difficult to estimate how much time was actually spent construct
 ing the Great Pyramid. There would have been periods, as with any project
 of this nature, when inclement weather, illness, and the like would have
 delayed the building program, and some years would have been better than
 others from this point of view. However, based on the techniques described
 here we can make an estimate of the construction time.
 With respect to the first 40 meters of the pyramid, we have seen that
 seventy blocks per lift for the core and outer casing blocks could have been
 achieved, assuming that two faces of the pyramid were used simultane
 ously. As the width of the base is 230 meters, decreasing at the height of 40
 meters to a plateau 169 meters wide, the average number of 5-meter-wide
 slipways would have been forty each side between ground level and 40
 meters. Given an adequate supply of blocks, there would have been a capac
 ity to move forty blocks up one face in unit time. The next question to ask
 is, "how long did it take, on average, to lift and position the blocks?" An esti
 mation can be made for this by looking at the sequence for one block,
 assuming that it had already been delivered to the base of the pyramid on
 its wooden sledge: (1) Connect the hauling rope to the block/sledge assem
 bly, 10 minutes; (2) Haul the block/sledge assembly up the side of the pyra
 mid and onto the flat plateau, 45 seconds assuming an average speed of 0.6
 meters per second?say one minute; (3) Move the block/sledge assembly
 across the plateau, 5 minutes (again, at 0.6 meters per second); (4) Unload
 the block from the sledge, 10 minutes; (5) Position the block, lower the
 sledge and rope down to the base of the pyramid, and disconnect the rope
 from the sledge, 30 minutes. Adding up the individual elements gives an
 overall time of approximately 56 minutes for lifting and positioning one
 21. Michael Jones and Angela Milward, "Survey of the Temple of Isis, Mistress of the
 Pyramid at Giza," Journal of the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities 12 (1982):
 139-51.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 351
 TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE
 APRIL
 2003
 VOL. 44
 block. Allowing for contingencies, let us round this up to one hour per
 block. Therefore, for the first 40 meters of the pyramid's height, the time
 taken to lift and put into position the estimated 1,400,000 blocks would
 have been 1,400,000 hours. This time is, of course, for each individual block
 being dealt with as a separate entity. However, if, on average, eighty slipways
 were operational between ground level and 40 meters, then eighty blocks
 could have been processed at any one time. Therefore, the time spent on
 this section of the pyramid per team would have been 1,400,000 -r- 80, or
 17,500 hours. Let us assume that, each year, 10 hours per day for 320 days
 of the year were spent on construction. This would give an approximate
 time of completion for the first 40 meters of the pyramid of 17,500 -^ (10
 X 320) = 5.47 years. Allowing additional time for moving the larger, heav
 ier, burial chamber blocks, it could be estimated that this element of con
 struction took about six years?assuming, again, that lifting took place
 simultaneously up two opposing faces of the pyramid and that all the other
 work associated with building (quarrying, transport, and so on) also took
 place simultaneously. We can use a similar approach for the next 40 meters
 of construction, up to a height of 80 meters. The average number of slip
 ways between these two heights would have been twenty-eight, with lifting
 taking place up one face only. Therefore, the time taken to lift and put into
 position the estimated 676,900 blocks in this section of the pyramid would
 have been 676,900 hours. (The time taken to haul the blocks up the face of
 the pyramid to a height of 80 meters would have been twice that for haul
 ing to a height of 40 meters, but because of its reduced size less time would
 have been required to move the blocks across the plateau, therefore the
 same overall time of one hour has been applied.) The individual team time
 would therefore be 676,900 -f- 28 = 24,175 hours. Applying the same build
 ing time criteria as before gives an approximate time of completion for the
 second 40 meters of the pyramid of 24,175 -r (10 X 320) = 7.55 years.
 Again, allowing some additional time for moving the larger blocks required
 for the burial chamber and passages, it could be estimated that this element
 of construction took about eight years. Thus, the estimated time needed to
 build to a height of 80 meters would have been fourteen years. From 80
 meters to completion of the block laying would probably have taken, based
 on the previous assumptions, an additional six years, meaning that the
 entire structure would have been completed in twenty years.
 Following completion of the block laying, there would then have been
 the task of dressing the outer casing blocks. This is very difficult to estimate
 but could well have taken a further two years to complete, assuming that
 work progressed on all four faces simultaneously. All this gives an estimated
 time for completion of the actual building work carried out on the Great
 Pyramid of twenty-two years. To this must be added time for preparing the
 site prior to building, setting out, building sledges, making ropes, and so
 on?say another year. The estimated completion time fits in with the gen
 352
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 EDWARDS I Building the Great Pyramid
 erally held view that the Great Pyramid was completed during the reign of
 King Khufu, which is thought to have lasted for a minimum of twenty
 three years.22
 In order to keep up with the construction work, a constant supply of
 cut stone blocks would have had to be available. During the first 40 meters
 of construction, which was the most intensive, an average of eighty blocks
 would have been required every sixty minutes. The core blocks would have Research
 been delivered to the building site direct from the adjacent quarry, while note
 the blocks from Tura and Aswan would have been brought overland.23
 During the most intensive stage of construction, that up to the 40-meter
 point, it can be estimated that an average workforce along the following lines
 would have been required. For haulers and setters, 40 teams of 50 men times
 2 hauling on the plateau, 40 teams of 5 times 2 setting the blocks, 40 teams
 of 4 times 2 working at the base, and 80 "lubricators," for a total of 4,800.
 During the building of the 6-meter-high pyramid in 1995, 12 Egyptian
 stonemasons quarried 186 blocks of similar size to those used for the core of
 the Great Pyramid in 22 days using iron tools. This equates to 0.7 blocks per
 day per man, or, over an 8 hour working day, 0.0875 blocks per hour. Com
 pensating for less effective copper tools, let's say 0.07 blocks per hour for the
 ancient stonemasons. The time taken for the hauling teams to complete this
 stage of the pyramid was estimated at 17,500 hours per team, which is the
 overall time. Therefore, in this time, and using the adjusted 1995 work rate
 as a guide, one stonemason would cut 1,225 blocks (17,500 X 0.07). The
 total number of blocks within this section is estimated at 1,400,000 blocks.
 Therefore, it is estimated that the number of stonemasons would have been
 1,400,000 -j- 1,225, or 1,143?say 1,200 men. As well as stonemasons, there
 would have been workers removing and transporting the blocks between the
 quarry and the pyramid. The sequence of transportation would have
 involved a round-trip estimated to have taken around 60 minutes per block.
 For a rate of 80 blocks per hour, and a team comprising 12 men, 960 work
 ers would have been required (80 X 12), so say 1,000 men. Obviously, there
 would have been many other workers involved with the construction
 process: joiners making and repairing the wooden sledges and other devices;
 rope makers making and repairing the necessary ropes required for hauling,
 water carriers, surveyors, supervisors, additional quarrymen, purveyors of
 food, and so on. It could be estimated that perhaps as many as 3,000 people
 were involved in these ancillary activities.
 These estimations do not attempt to include the workforce involved in
 transporting the outer casing blocks from Tura or the granite blocks from
 22. Lehner, 206.
 23. Eugen Strouhal, Life in Ancient Egypt (Cambridge, 1992), 173-82. In the case of
 the blocks from Aswan a fair proportion of the journey would probably have been via
 boat along the Nile.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 353
 TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURE
 APRIL
 2003
 VOL. 44
 Aswan. The figures do, however, attempt to convey some idea of the likely
 workforce at the construction site. Adding up the various elements gives an
 approximate total workforce in the immediate environs of the pyramid of
 about ten thousand people during the most intensive period of construc
 tion. It has been proposed that as many as twenty-five thousand workers
 were involved at the building site during the most intensive period of con
 struction.24 However, a significant proportion of this workforce would have
 been involved with building and maintaining massive construction ramps,
 which, using the methodology put forward here, would not have been
 required.
 Conclusion
 The method of construction for the Great Pyramid proposed here,
 using the angled faces of the structure itself as surfaces on which to trans
 port the blocks used to construct the pyramid, provides a more logical and
 practical alternative methodology to the view that massive, separately con
 structed ramps were used to move the stone blocks. Apart from eliminat
 ing the need to build separate ramps, such a methodology is considerably
 more energy efficient and far less time consuming, as it removes the need
 for hauling teams to go trudging up and down ramps all day long because
 the teams would have remained on the pyramids' level plateau?where they
 may indeed have lived during the more intensive periods of construction.
 The proposition that every individual block was elevated into position
 using levers and packing pieces is also an unsatisfactory solution; such a
 process would have been extremely awkward and risky due to the numer
 ous maneuvers involved with each individual elevation. As with the sepa
 rate ramp theory, the lifting teams would have ascended with each block
 lifted, which is inefficient. It is therefore suggested that levering techniques
 were only utilized for assisting the builders in a very localized fashion, such
 as loading and unloading sledges and positioning the building blocks in
 their final locations. The proposal that a form of shaduf was used to elevate
 the building blocks is also deemed an impractical solution.
 It is estimated that the Great Pyramid took about twenty-three years to
 complete, and that during the most intensive period of work around ten
 thousand people were involved in its construction at the building site.
 It can be concluded, from contemporary technical evidence relating to
 the hauling of large blocks of stone, that the wall painting in the tomb of
 Djehuty-hotep at Deir el-Bersha is accurate in terms of the number of
 haulers depicted in it.
 24. Lehner (n. 1 above), 225.
 354
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
